Expat-friendly car insurance providers in Germany

Breakdown insurance ( Schutzbriefversicherung )

No claims bonus ( Schadenfreiheitsrabatt - SFR)

Taking out German car insurance

All drivers in Germany must be covered by some form of car insurance. You cannot register a vehicle without it. If you are a long-term resident in Germany, you will need to have German car insurance, even if you brought your car to Germany from abroad ; foreign car insurance does not suffice.

The price of car insurance in Germany depends on various risk factors, including the driver’s age, experience and location, as well as the value and engine size of the car. If you have only just learnt to drive , for instance, your insurance is likely to be more expensive. It might be worth opting to pay a higher excess in exchange for lower monthly premiums.

Expat-friendly car insurance providers in Germany

Not sure where to start? What type of cover would be best for you, and can you bring your no claims bonus with you from abroad? Our recommended car insurance providers all give coverage in Germany:

MW Expat Solutions (car insurance broker in English, offering up to 45% discount)

Motorcycle insurance providers:

Broadly speaking, there are three types of German car insurance. The cost of your policy depends on how comprehensive the cover you choose is.

Third-party coverage ( Haftpflicht )

If you wish to register your car, having this type of insurance is the minimum legal requirement. It covers any damage you or your car might inflict on other people, cars or property, including medical bills. It does not cover damage to your own car, if you were responsible.

As well as covering third-party damage, partial coverage also protects you in the case of accidental damage, fire and theft (but not vandalism).

Comprehensive coverage ( Vollkasko )

Comprehensive insurance is, as the name suggests, fairly comprehensive, covering third parties, fire, theft and any damages you might make to your own car or yourself. If you buy a car on finance through a dealership, or lease a vehicle , you may be required to take out this type of insurance.

Breakdown insurance ( Schutzbriefversicherung )

You might also consider purchasing breakdown insurance, which covers the costs of having your car towed in the case of a breakdown or accident. Some policies also provide a rental car while your car is being fixed.

ADAC (Allgemeine Deutsche Automobil-Club) and AvD (Automobil-Club von Deutschland) are the two main companies offering breakdown and roadside assistance in Germany.  ADAC membership costs around 54 euros per year.

No claims bonus ( Schadenfreiheitsrabatt - SFR)

It may be possible to bring your no claims bonus with you from your home country, in order to reduce the overall cost of your car insurance. It is a good idea to request a letter from your insurance company at home, attesting to your driving record. Your new insurance company may accept this as proof for a no claims bonus.

Taking out German car insurance

The German car insurance market is fairly competitive, so it is worth shopping around to search for the best deals. A price comparison website is a good place to start and can help you make a decision by comparing policies from different providers.

It is usually possible to take out a policy online. You'll need to supply a few personal details, such as your driving licence number , a form of ID, details about your car, and your German bank account . You may also need documents relating to the vehicle purchase.

Take out motor vehicle insurance in Germany

Getting your eVB number ( elektronische Versicherungsbestätigung )

Once you have chosen a provider and taken out a policy, the provider will issue you with an eVB number (elektronische Verischerungsbestätigung ), usually via email. Along with your TÜV certificate and vehicle tax form , you need to provide this number to the car registration authority in order to register your car.

Making a car insurance claim in Germany

If you do have an accident and need to make a claim on your car insurance, it's important to contact your insurance company as soon as possible. In Germany, claims need to be submitted within two weeks of the accident.

Make sure that you exchange details with the other party or parties involved in the incident, take pictures of the damage, and get the contact details of anyone who witnessed the incident. You only need to inform the police if the accident involved serious damage or the other party is not present (for instance if you crashed into a parked car).

If you need to submit a claim with the other party's insurance company but don't have the details, you can input the licence plate number to the Central Office of Car Insurers to receive their information.

Each insurer will have its own process for submitting claims, but many allow you to do this online. You will need to submit details of the claim, including any supporting evidence, and then wait to hear back from your insurer. Claims are usually processed within three months.

Like many other types of insurance contracts in Germany, car insurance typically auto-renews each year. If you wish to cancel your policy or switch to a new provider you'll need to give at least one month's notice. Since most car insurance policies run from January to December, this typically happens before the end of November, so that the switchover can take place in the new year.

You have a special right of termination (meaning the notice period does not have to be observed) in the following circumstances:

Your car insurance premium is going up. Your insurer must give you at least one month's notice of the change.

You are unhappy with how your insurer handled a claim, backed up with written evidence.

You have sold your car, in which case the new owner takes on your current policy, although they have the right to cancel and pick a new insurance provider.

This page uses affiliate links.