Germany might have a pretty good public transportation system , but for some people driving is the only way to travel. Our driving in Germany section covers everything you need to know about this form of transport .

First things first, there are a few rules that expats driving in Germany should take note of, as they may differ to your home country:

The legal driving age in Germany is 18. You are not permitted to drive if you are below this age, even if the legal driving age in your home country is lower.

You are obligated to carry your driving licence with you at all times when driving in Germany. If you are caught without it you risk being fined.

Seatbelts must be worn at all times by both the driver and any passengers. Children under the age of 12 or less than 150 centimetres tall must be in a child seat.

You must use a hands free system to use your mobile phone while driving.

By law, all cars in Germany must carry reflective jackets, a warning triangle, headlamp beam deflectors and a first aid kit.

Drivers and passengers on motorcycles and mopeds must wear safety helmets.

Even during daylight hours, mopeds and motorcycles must be driven with their passing lights on.

You may need an emissions sticker to enter certain German cities such as Berlin , Cologne , Munich and Stuttgart .

Contrary to popular belief, the vast majority of German roads - including stretches of the autobahn - are subject to speed limits.

Unless otherwise specified, the speed limit in Germany is determined by the kind of road you are driving on, as follows:

80 km/h on any road if you are towing a trailer or caravan

50 km/h on any road if your vehicle is equipped with snow chains

Germany also has some minimum speed limits on motorways:

The legal limit for drinking and driving in Germany is 0,5 per mille (50mg per 100ml of blood). This is lower than in many countries.

There are also some exceptions to this rule:

If you have a blood alcohol limit of between 0,3 and 0,49 per mille and you are involved in accident or otherwise judged to be incapable of driving safely, you could face a traffic fine.

If you are a newly qualified driver in your two-year probationary period, or a young driver under the age of 21, the alcohol limit is 0,0 per mille.

If you want to feel more confident before getting behind the wheel in Germany, Tripiamo’s online driving guide is specially designed for international travellers and relocating expats, and walks you through everything from essential road rules to common signage and real-world driving scenarios. It’s self-paced, takes about 45 minutes to complete, and is reviewed by a certified German driving instructor.

Useful links for drivers in Germany

How long is your foreign driving licence valid for? Can you exchange it for a German one? Do you need to take any tests? Our Driving licence page answers all your questions.

Nationals of some countries will need to take either the practical or theory driving test in Germany in order to exchange their driving licences. Other expats may be considering learning to drive for the first time. Our guide walks you through the process, from obtaining your first driving licence and registering with a driving school ( Fahrschule ), to completing your first aid course and taking your driving test.

Want your own set of wheels? Germany has a strong car culture and a thriving market of new and used cars for sale. Our guide walks you through the process of buying a car in Germany .

If you need a car only temporarily, you could consider renting one. It's relatively simple to rent a car in Germany, and there are plenty of different rental companies on the market, including:

To rent a car in Germany, you'll need to be at least 18 (the legal driving age), but most companies won't rent to anyone under the age of 21 (or sometimes even 25). You'll also need:

An international driving permit (IDP) if your driving licence is not in English

A credit card (not a debit card)

Note that almost all cars in Germany are manual ("stick-shift"), but you may be able to request a car with an automatic transmission from your chosen rental company. Note that the base prices offered by rental companies also usually exclude insurance.

If you want to have your own car but can't afford (or don't want to) buy one outright, a car lease is a flexible arrangement that lets you drive a (brand new or used) car for a set period of time for a fixed monthly fee. It generally works out cheaper than a long-term rental. Find out more about car leasing in Germany .

Registering your car in Germany

All cars in Germany need to be registered with the local vehicle registration office . This involves submitting some paperwork in order to receive German licence plates for your car. Find out what the requirements are and how the registration process works.

Vehicle tax, car insurance and technical inspections

There are a few administrative issues car-owners in Germany need to take care of. If you have bought a new (or used) car, or have imported your own, you will need to complete these steps before being able to register your vehicle. This includes:

Submitting to technical inspections ( Hauptuntersuchungen ) every 24 months

Getting an emissions sticker , if you need to drive through an environmental zone

Importing and exporting cars in Germany

Found your dream car abroad? Or just can’t bear to leave your old one behind? Our guide to importing cars walks you through the administration, taxes and fees involved with bringing foreign cars into Germany.

Whether you are leaving Germany and want to take your vehicle with you, or have bought a car here with the specific purpose of exporting it abroad, our guide to exporting cars from Germany explains the key elements of the process.

Perhaps the first thought people have when they think about driving in Germany, the German autobahn has achieved almost mythical status worldwide as the motorway with no speed limit. We walk you through the reality on the roads, including rules for driving on the autobahn, maps and figures.

There are over 1.000 road signs in the German traffic code! If you're planning on hitting the roads in Germany, you should make sure you are familiar with the different German road signs and their meanings.

Germany punishes traffic offences with fines, penalty licence points, driving bans and (in extreme cases) imprisonment. These penalties are standardised in the Bußgeldkatalog . Learn about some of the most common fines issued in Germany , and what to do if you receive a warning fine or penalty order.

This page uses affiliate links.