Emissions stickers in Germany (Umweltplakette)

What is an emissions sticker ( Umweltplakette )?

Who needs an emissions sticker?

How do I know what emissions class my car is?

How do I get an emissions sticker?

How long is the emissions sticker valid for?

In an effort to limit air pollution, several of Germany’s major cities have introduced environmental green zones ( Umweltzonen ). In order to drive into these zones, you will need a so-called emissions sticker (also known as an environmental sticker or Umweltplakette ). This applies to both German and foreign vehicles.

What is an emissions sticker ( Umweltplakette )?

In Germany and the rest of the European Union, all vehicles are assigned an emissions “class” or group ( Schadstoffklasse ) according to how much carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons, non-methane hydrocarbons and particulate matter they emit.

There are currently six emissions classes in the EU - Emissions Classes Euro 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, with 1 having the highest emissions - plus an additional 00 Emissions Class with even higher emissions.

In Germany, these six emissions classes are divided into four pollutant groups for the purposes of the emission sticker. These four groups are:

No sticker : Cars with petrol engines without a catalytic converter, diesel vehicles with particulate emissions that meet Euro 1 or worse.

Red sticker : Diesel vehicles that fall into the Euro 2 emissions class.

Yellow sticker : Diesel vehicles that fall into the Euro 3 emissions class, all vehicles that have a particle filter retrofitted in accordance with particle reduction level 1.

Green sticker : Vehicles that meet the Euro 4 emissions class or better.

Most newer cars (and, naturally, all electric and hybrid vehicles) will qualify for a green sticker, but if your vehicle is more than 12 years old, it may not be allowed to enter some or most emissions zones.

Useful links for drivers in Germany

Who needs an emissions sticker?

You will need an emissions sticker for your car if you wish to drive through any environmental zones in Germany (see below). This also applies to electric vehicles (with the exception of the state of Bavaria , where electric cars do not need an emissions sticker).

The following categories of vehicles are exempt from environmental car bans and therefore do not require a sticker:

Mobile machinery and equipment like tractors

Ambulances and other medical/disabled transport vehicles

Police, fire brigade and military vehicles

German-registered classic cars with an H registration plate or red 07 plate

How do I know what emissions class my car is?

Each vehicle is assigned to a pollutant group based on the emissions code number entered into the car’s registration documents. You can find out your own code by checking part one of your vehicle registration certificate. With this number, you can then check which pollutant group your vehicle is assigned to by checking this document from ADAC .

Where are the environmental zones?

There are 39 environmental zones in Germany. The controlled zones are primarily located in major urban areas, including the cities of Berlin , Cologne , Munich and Stuttgart . You can see a full map of the areas here .

How do I know if I am entering an environmental zone?

The beginning and end of all environmental zones in Germany are clearly marked by road signs . As well as marking the beginning of the environmental zone ( Umwelt Zone ), the sign may also be accompanied by an additional placard showing which emission stickers are allowed to enter the zone (e.g. a sign with a green sticker plus the word “ frei ” indicates that cars with green stickers are allowed to enter).

How do I get an emissions sticker?

Emissions stickers can only be issued by certain authorities in Germany, including car registration authorities and companies authorised to carry out technical inspections , including Dekra, GTÜ, KÜS and TÜV.

It’s also possible to buy one online from companies like Dekra and TÜV. Certain cities, including Berlin, Cologne and Stuttgart also offer online ordering options.

How long is the emissions sticker valid for?

Once bought, emissions stickers are valid for as long as you need them. Note that they are related to the car’s registration plate, so if for any reason you change your number plate (for instance if you change address and re-register the car ), you will need to purchase a new emissions sticker.

Emissions stickers are also designed in such a way that, once stuck, they come apart if they are removed from the windscreen. It is therefore not possible to remove the emissions sticker and try to re-attach it.

How much do environmental stickers cost?

The environmental sticker costs somewhere between 5 and 20 euros.

This page uses affiliate links.