Exporting a vehicle from Germany to a non-EU country

Registering your car in your destination country

Whether you have bought a car in Germany and wish to take it with you when you leave the country, or you are selling your car abroad, there are a few reasons why you might be looking into the prospect of exporting a car from Germany. This page looks at how the process works and lists some considerations you need to take into account.

The process for exporting a car from Germany differs based on a few key factors:

Whether you are exporting the vehicle to another EU country or to somewhere outside the European Union

Whether the car is registered in Germany or not

Whether you are transporting the car yourself (i.e. driving it out of the country) or arranging for it to be transported by someone else or a company (e.g. shipped or freighted to another destination)

Exporting cars is big business in Germany, and so as you might expect there are many companies that specialise in helping people export their cars abroad. Many relocation companies also offer this as a service. The major benefit of working with an experienced company is that they can take care of all of the paperwork and formalities on your behalf.

If you would prefer to transport the vehicle yourself and drive it out of Germany, then there are a number of formalities that need to be taken care of.

Exporting a car within the European Union

If you are exporting your vehicle within the European Union, you benefit from a simplified procedure that means that vehicles can be transferred without customs duties and other formalities. However, if you are selling the car abroad, VAT may be payable in Germany.

In order to transport your car, you will need to first deregister your vehicle with your local road traffic authority. The authority can then provide you with temporary licence plates ( Kurzzeitkennzeichen ) for your vehicle. These are valid for around five days and allow you to drive the unregistered car out of Germany. It’s a good idea to also take out insurance that covers you for vehicle transfers.

Once you reach the German border, you need to declare the vehicle as an export to customs officials in order to receive the correct paperwork to register the vehicle as an import in your destination country.

Exporting a vehicle from Germany to a non-EU country

If you have bought a vehicle in Germany and wish to export it to a non-EU country for private use, the process is a little more complicated.

Clearing your vehicle for export

First, you must make a customs declaration. If you are going to be exporting the vehicle on its own wheels (i.e. drive it out of Germany, rather than transport it in any other way) you can make a customs declaration at the border through which you are leaving the EU. If the vehicle is worth less than 1.000 euros and weighs no more than 1.000 kilograms, you can make this declaration orally.

Otherwise, you must first lodge an export declaration via the electronic ATLAS export procedure ( ATLAS-Ausfuhr ). This is normally done at the customs office responsible in your area, or where your vehicle exits the country. Then, before the vehicle actually leaves the EU, it must be physically presented to the customs office of export. If approved, it will be released for export and given an Export Accompanying Document (EAD).

If you are driving your vehicle to a non-EU country, it’s recommended to do this on export licence plates ( Ausfuhrkennzeichen ). An export licence plate is white with black lettering and has a red bar on the right-hand side that shows its expiration date.

To obtain export licence plates, you will need to go to your local vehicle registration office and present:

Proof of special liability insurance for car exports (usually purchasable from the vehicle registration office)

Both parts of your vehicle’s registration certificate

Proof of a valid technical inspection - if you do not have this, you will have to arrange for your car to be towed or transported abroad

Proof that you have paid your motor vehicle tax

Your old licence plates (if applicable)

At this appointment, the vehicle registration authority will deregister your vehicle and withdraw part one of your vehicle registration certificate. They can issue you with a new, temporary International Registration Certificate, which you may need to take your car to a non-EU country. Note that you may need to bring your vehicle with you to this appointment.

Registering your car in your destination country

Be aware that your destination country will have its own process for testing and registering imported cars. You may also be required to pay import duties. Check with the car registration authority in your home country to make sure you are complying with all necessary regulations.