Penalties for traffic violations in Germany

Fines, points & driving bans for common traffic violations in Germany ( Bußgeldkatalog )

What to do after receiving a traffic fine in Germany

Do foreigners still get traffic fines in Germany?

Can traffic fines affect my residency status in Germany?

If you break traffic rules while driving in Germany - for instance speeding, parking illegally, running through a red light or drunk driving - you can expect to receive a fine. For more serious violations, you may also receive penalty points on your driving licence or a (temporary) driving suspension. Here’s what you need to know about traffic fines in Germany.

Penalties for traffic violations in Germany

Broadly speaking, there are four different types of penalties for drivers who commit traffic violations in Germany:

Fines (warning fines and penalty orders)

Penalty points on driving licences

The rules for warnings, fines, penalty points and driving bans are standardised and set out in the catalogue of offences ( Bußgeldkatalog ), which applies nationally throughout Germany. This means that similar offences receive the same penalties, no matter which federal state they take place in.

Minor traffic offences in Germany usually land the driver with a monetary fine. You might be issued a fine on the spot, find it attached to your windscreen, or be sent it in the post . There are  two types of fines in Germany:

A warning fine ( Verwarngeld ) for minor violations with fines of up to €55

A penalty order ( Bußgeldbescheid ) for more serious violations with fines over €55

Warning fines are sometimes issued for minor traffic violations. With a warning fine, the authorities essentially offer the driver a simple get-out to stop proceedings against them by paying a small fine. If the warning fine is not paid before the specified cut-off date, it is converted into a penalty order.

A penalty order is a more formal notice that tells the accused that authorities have commenced proceedings against them. Before you are served a penalty order, you will usually receive a hearing form ( Anhörungsbogen ), which describes the alleged offence in more detail and allows you to comment.

If your response on the hearing form does not result in the charge being dropped, authorities will issue a fine, which comes with additional procedural costs and postage fees. If you pay the fine, the case against you will be closed. You can, however, choose to appeal the fine (see below).

Penalty points on your driving licence

More serious traffic offences can be punishable with both fines and penalty points on your driving licence. If you have ever heard someone in Germany talk about “ Punkte in Flensburg ” (points in Flensburg), they are talking about penalty points. This is because these traffic violations are centrally recorded on the driving aptitude register ( Fahr­eignungs­register - FAER), a database managed by the Federal Motor Transport Authority (KBA), which is based in Flensburg, Schleswig-Holstein .

Note that the Flensburg register doesn’t only apply to car and truck drivers - if you commit an offence while cycling or riding a motorbike, you can also receive penalty licence points. It’s therefore perfectly possible to lose your driving licence based on traffic violations you committed while cycling.

You can receive up to three points per traffic violation in Germany. If you accumulate eight or more penalty points on your driving aptitude register, your driving licence is confiscated. You can, however, take measures to reduce the number of points you have:

If you get to four or five points, you will receive a written warning and be informed that you can voluntarily attend a driving aptitude seminar, enabling you to knock one point off your total. You can only take the seminar once every five years, and you cannot attend one if you accrue more than five points.

If you get to six or seven points, you will receive a written warning that your driving licence may be revoked.

If you receive eight points, you will receive a driving ban of at least six months.

According to the insurance comparison site Verivox, having penalty points on your licence can make your car insurance more expensive. However, this depends on your provider, as the majority of car insurers in Germany actually do not take points into account when calculating premiums.

Flensburg points do eventually expire. The length of time before they expire depends on the nature of the traffic offence:

Minor offences with one point are deleted after two and a half years.

Intermediate offences with two points are deleted after five years.

Major offences with three points are deleted after 10 years.

You can check how many points you have on your licence online on the KBA website if you have an ID card or residence permit with the eID function activated. Alternatively, you can request this information by post or visit the KBA office in person.

Useful links for drivers in Germany

A temporary driving ban ( Fahrverbot ) is an additional penalty in Germany that can be imposed alongside fines and imprisonment for more serious traffic offences. A driving ban is usually temporary, lasting between one and six months. During that time, the person’s driving licence is kept in official custody and they are not allowed to drive.

First-time offenders usually have the option of choosing when in the next four months they want their driving ban to start, but if a driver has committed an offence in the two years before the new offence, they generally do not have this option - although exceptions may be made, for instance, if the person would lose their job or face economic hardships as the result of the ban.

Once the driving ban expires, the offender gets their driving licence back and can return to the roads.

A permanent driving ban is known as a “licence withdrawal” in Germany ( Entzug der Fahrerlaubnis ). This is when your driving licence is revoked for a serious traffic offence and you lose your right to drive motor vehicles.

Once a suspension period has passed, you can reapply for a driving licence, but you will most likely have to retake your theory and practical driving exams , and may have to take a medical-psychological examination (MPU) to qualify.

Fines, points & driving bans for common traffic violations in Germany ( Bußgeldkatalog )

The Bußgeldkatalog sets out the standard rates for warnings and fines, and the duration of driving bans, for traffic violations in Germany. It is periodically updated to make penalties harsher or more lenient.

As of 2026, some of the most common fines laid out in the Bußgeldkatalog are as follows:

Almost all roads in Germany have speed limits - even stretches of the autobahn - and drivers caught exceeding the speed limit face fines, penalty points and even driving bans. The amount of the speeding fine depends on whether you were driving in a built-up area or not, and how many kilometres per hour (km/h) you were driving over the speed limit:

* Unless it is your only offence in the last 12 months.

* Unless it is your only offence in the last 12 months.

The blood alcohol limit in Germany is 0,5 per mille. The THC limit is 3,5 nanograms per millilitre of blood. The penalties for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs increase in severity depending on whether it is your first, second, or third offence. A higher penalty applies if your blood alcohol content is 1,1 per mille or more.

Although the blood alcohol limit is 0,5 per mille, you can still face penalties if you are found to have a blood alcohol level of 0,3 to 0,49 per mille and you are involved in an accident or show signs of struggling to drive, like making errors or having slow reactions.

An alcohol and cannabis ban applies to newly qualified drivers during their probationary period ( Probezeit ), which lasts two years, and to all young drivers under the age of 21.

You should also be aware that riding a bicycle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs is also considered a violation of traffic rules in Germany.

It’s also important to pay attention to parking and no-stopping road signs in Germany , as you can be fined for parking or stopping incorrectly. Here are some common reasons why stopping or parking tickets are issued and the fine amounts:

If your improper/illegal parking or stopping is deemed to have endangered other road users or caused property damage, you may receive a higher fine and even a penalty licence point.

Here are the fines for some other common traffic violations:

Again, if the traffic offence is deemed to have endangered other road users or caused damage, you may receive a higher fine and penalty licence points.

You can find a full list of fines online on Bussgeldkatalog.org .

What to do after receiving a traffic fine in Germany

Traffic fines in Germany can be issued on the spot, attached to the vehicle’s windscreen, or (most commonly) sent in the post. If you receive a traffic fine in Germany, it’s important to deal with it quickly, as ignoring it can make the situation worse and more costly overall.

Receiving a warning ( Verwarngeld )

Authorities sometimes issue warnings for minor traffic violations. You can halt proceedings against you by paying the warning within the timeframe specified (usually one week). Warnings are not entered into the Flensburg register.

Since the warning procedure is a simplified procedure, you cannot object to the warning. You can, however, provide information about the offence via the hearing form, for instance, if you were not the person driving at the time of the traffic offence.

If you do not pay the warning fine by the set deadline, authorities will initiate a penalty order procedure against you. This will result in you having to pay additional costs.

Receiving a hearing form ( Anhörungsbogen )

The hearing form is the first step in the penalty order procedure. It is essentially a document that lays out the case against you in detail, provides any relevant evidence (such as a speed camera photo), specifies the fine amount, and gives you the opportunity to comment on the allegations. Primarily, it is used to identify who was driving the vehicle at the time of the offence.

You are obliged to fill out the hearing form and return it within one week if you are facing a penalty order (fines of €60 or more), but not if a warning fine of up to €55 h€as been issued.

You are required to include certain personal information in your hearing form, including your name, address, place of birth and nationality. All other information is voluntary. In theory, you should only include information that exonerates you - for instance if you can prove that someone else was driving the vehicle at the time of the offence.

Providing incorrect information on your hearing form is a punishable offence and could result in a fine of up to €1.000 or a prison sentence of up to five years.

Receiving your penalty order ( Bußgeldbescheid )

If the authorities do not decide to drop the case based on your returned hearing form, they will continue with fine proceedings and issue you with a penalty order. Like the hearing form, this will state the specific charge and the fine payable.

It is not uncommon for this fine to be higher than that outlined in the hearing form, for instance if authorities now have evidence of additional offences being committed (such as you not wearing a seatbelt or using your mobile phone while driving).

The penalty notice procedure also comes with additional costs like procedural fees (minimum €25) and postal fees.

If you do not appeal the penalty order (see below), then after two weeks the fine becomes final. It is not possible to review the fine after this stage, and the amount payable becomes due.

Appealing a traffic fine in Germany

You can choose to appeal against the penalty notice, but you must do this within two weeks of receiving it. Appeals need to be made in writing on paper, with a signature. An email will not suffice.

Appeals are normally made on one of the following three grounds:

The identity of the driver cannot be sufficiently proven.

The accusation is based on inaccurate measurements (for speeding and tailgating offences).

The penalty goes beyond the statutory provisions for this type of offence.

If proceedings are not discontinued based on your objection, the case will most likely be brought in front of the district court, and you as the driver will need to be present for the hearing. You may face higher fines plus possible court and legal costs if your appeal is not successful. If you are considering appealing a traffic fine in Germany, it is  wise to consult a lawyer for advice.

Statute of limitations for traffic fines

It’s worth knowing that there are strict rules about when traffic fines have to be issued in Germany. The limitation period is:

Three months for administrative offences

Six months for alcohol and drug offences

This means that the responsible authority must take action against the driver within this timeframe for the case to hold up. Sending out the hearing form is considered sufficient.

Do foreigners still get traffic fines in Germany?

If you’re driving a foreign car in Germany and commit a traffic offence, a penalty order can still make its way to your address abroad. Don’t be tempted to ignore these letters, as - as is the case with residents - not answering can actually worsen the case against you and land you with a bigger fine.

Can traffic fines affect my residency status in Germany?

Generally speaking, being convicted of a small administrative offence like running a red light or not wearing a seatbelt shouldn’t stop you from being able to apply for or renew a residence permit in Germany.

However, more serious criminal cases - for instance if you are a repeat offender or commit a dangerous traffic offence that results in a large fine or even imprisonment - can jeopardise your chances of being eligible for permanent residence or German citizenship .

This page uses affiliate links.